---
layout: post
title: "Why I created this blog"
description: "Description and Benefits of Albizia"
date: 2021-12-05
hero_height: is-medium
hero_darken: true
published: true
series: about_this_blog_series
---

## Why I created this blog

As a kid, I was active and excited by nature. I also grew up in a rural part of the mountains, which lead me to have a natural respect for the environment. But in my teens and early 20’s I started thinking more deeply about my individual impact on my surrounding environment. I was anxious about my impact on the environment and constantly overanalyzing health choices. This feeling heightened the more I tuned into the world around me.

It was difficult to hear about the onslaught of natural disasters occurring over the last few years or the forecasts of what our world would look like in 20, 50, 100 years due to Climate Change. Not only because it’s sad to think of the Earth changing, but also because the rate of human change does not follow Earth’s change, and it’s heartbreaking to hear of the damage Climate Change causes for populations around the world. I felt, and still feel, a deep existential dread.

On top of that, in the US alone, we are reckoning with a social landscape that subsidizes some groups and undercuts others. As a white women born into an average middle-class upbringing, I am privy to more security than others, and I don’t want to take that lightly. While this might not obviously connect to health, sustainability, and frugality, I believe that our choices are not mutually exclusive.

The cellphone I decided to buy two years ago because it was cheap, durable, straightforward, and, importantly, not an Apple product? It was made in China. But really, it was only assembled in China. The individual parts were manufactured in a dozen other countries, processed from minerals that were mined from a dozen more, with freighters transporting the materials back and forth across the globe. Once assembled, it was then probably shipped to the US or elsewhere before getting to the US, where it was shipped over land to new facilities, and passed between dozens of pairs of hands belonging to low-wage workers, a majority of whom belong to marginalized populations. This all before it was packaged and sent to me. 

Not only did this small, seemingly insignificant, decision touch so many people, in mining and transporting the materials, whole ecosystems were affected.

I realize that this could be perceived as me soliloquizing to never buy anything, ever, in case it leaves a mark. But that's not what I mean. Instead, I hope for a consumption reckoning. For individuals to be more mindful and intentional when buying, or more broadly, when following habits. This relies on making conscious choices that ask what timeline do I create with this decision?



### A couple notes that I feel the need to address as I write this

1. When reading this, it’s easy to think I’m saying that the time we are living in now is the worst it’s ever been. However, in reality, I think it’s over-aggrandizing to say that; I’m sure every generation can point to contemporary events of the same nature. Instead, I hope to relate that current events and forecasts concern me. And this makes me hyper-aware of the choices I make and what I can do to reduce my part of the forecast.

2. I’ve had discussions over the years with multiple people about how the problems of today are not an individual’s problems to solve – they are the companies, governments, corporations, etc. that have created oceans of wasteland and promoted over-consumption through psychological manipulation, unfair commercial practices (among others), and more, on such a massive scale that it would be impossible to make a difference. 

   While I agree that as an individual, I’m not going to move the needle make a noticeable global change, I still hope to promote a lifestyle where I don’t support policy decisions or products that perpetuate these problems. Don't let 'best' be the enemy of 'better'. Best in this sense would be the companies taking ownership and paying retribution for the damage they've inflicted. But better, is what I'm able to do, which helps even on the smallest of scales. In a way, I’m voting with my dollar, but in the end I'm voting with my values. 