---
layout: post
title:  "What is friction and how can it help us change our habits?"
date:   2022-01-02 10:50:07
description: "Habits come in two different forms"
hero_height: is-medium
hero_darken: true
image: /bulma-clean-theme/img/friction.jfif
hero_image: /bulma-clean-theme/img/friction.jfif
published: true
tags: habits friction fast slow Daniel-Kahneman
series: habits_series
toc: true
toc_title: Contents
summary: Friction, a concept most people are familiar with from one science class or another, is also a term from behavioral economics, which can largely be thought of as a subfield of both psychology and economics.
---

Friction, a concept most people are familiar with from one science class or another, is also a term from behavioral economics, which can largely be thought of as a subfield of both psychology and economics.

## Behavioral Economics

In general, **behavioral economics** examines human behavior and decision-making. While more of a psychological science in practice, it is also considered an economic discipline for how individual decision-making affects broader socio-economic trends. For instance, behavioral economists might study the proportion of people that bought this particular product compared to another, and why? Or what made this insurance plan, or that gym membership more popular. While behaviorists are curious about particular decisions, they, more accurately, are curious about what made this decision so appealing out of the array of decisions available. Why did they choose an Apple product vs Samsung or Motorola? 

Most behaviors seem obvious and therefore deliberate: affirming strongly held beliefs - like the decision to attend a place of worship (if you have a particular faith) or the decision to join an extraterrestrial book club (if you believe in aliens); performing a practical or efficient task – like doing your laundry because you ran out of clean underwear or taking the train to work because it’s faster than driving. 

Nobel Prize winning psychologist Daniel Kahneman, however, has a new perspective (spoiler alert: it changed how we view psychology and behavioral economics forever). In his 2011 book, Thinking Fast and Slow, he posits that our thinking, and more than that, our behavior, operates on two settings: slow and fast. 

#### Slow Thinking 

**Slow thinking** refers to decisions requiring consideration, deconstruction, or analysis. It can range from simple thought to deep deliberation. You might be navigating somewhere you’ve never been before, or answering a complex question. You might be learning a new instrument and carefully considering where to place your fingers. These actions generally take more time and brain power, but are necessary for navigating the surrounding world.

#### Fast Thinking

**Fast thinking**, on the other hand, applies to decisions that are automatic and require little to no thought to motivate us. They are subconscious or intuitive - we have done them for so long we do them unthinkingly or we do them because of *gut instinct* – a principle not known for its scientific rigor, yet still behaviorally meaningful. This is not to say that we are being lazy; it would be impossible to think critically about every decision and movement every day – especially for activities like walking, breathing, speaking, or even putting your shoes and socks on (are you a left foot first kind of person or a right one?). Some things need to be automatic to free up space for other things that require more thought. In a way, you could call this task prioritization. 

But thinking fast is where our habits tend to catch up with us. According to James Clear, author of Atomic Habits, habits are small decisions you make and actions you perform every day. In fact, some researchers think they make up about 40% of our daily behaviors.[[1\]](#_ftn1) Habits are fast thinking and thus mostly intuitive. Much like Pavlov’s drooling dogs[[2\]](#_ftn2), habits occur on impulse. 

## Friction

So where does friction come in? **Friction** refers to the factors that make it harder to accomplish our desired goals[[3\]](#_ftn3) or demotivate us from habits we otherwise would pursue. It might be obvious, but the easier a task, or the less steps involved, the more likely we are to do it. For instance, which involves more steps - elevator or staircase? Friction is our staircase [[4\]](#_ftn4) Like the physical friction that slows objects down, behavioral friction makes it just a little more difficult to achieve behaviors we desire. 

When we make a decision to do something, but are unable to follow through, it is often friction that swoops in at the 11th hour and hinders our efforts. The worst part? We don't consciously register when friction impedes us - it just happens. Ever wanted to stop at the grocery store on your way home, but the parking lot was full? So you think, "I'll do it tomorrow!" Friction strikes again.

Because we are not thinking critically about our actions when friction affects them, it is our fast, and thus automatic, thinking impacted. More than that, our habits - the little daily behaviors we may not realize we have - may be defined by friction.  This in part, informs why implementing new habits, or overriding old ones, can be so difficult. 

Friction, however, is not just a negative force - it can also assist us.

#### So how does friction work?

Friction plays two roles in our efforts.

**1.)  Increasing:**  We can use friction to our advantage when trying to demotivate a behavior by consciously increasing friction - or making it harder to pursue that habit.

If you have a chocolate or candy affinity, placing it on the top shelf of your cupboard can help in your efforts to ditch the habit. It accomplishes two things. 1.) The candy is out of sight, thus when you're feeling snacky or bored, you might not instinctively grab for it. 2.) By keeping it out of reach, it's more difficult to get to. You might not want it because it would require additional effort to get to. You have created a staircase when previously you had an elevator.

**2.)  Reducing:** We can motivate other behaviors by reducing the frictions around them - or finding ways to make these habits easier.

Trying to eat more fruits and veggies instead of chocolate and candy? Try prepping your fruits and veggies ahead of time. Cut them into smaller peices and keep them in a tupperware. This makes the veggies more snackable and appealing and thus makes you more inclined to eat them when you're feeling snacky or maybe prepping other meals.



Companies, too, take friction into consideration when marketing their products and ensuring you buy. It’s in their best interest that you continue purchasing, and it’s a common practice now for company websites to ask if you would like to save your card information – they, like you, would rather you not have to get up for your wallet. Thus, by identifying and eliminating friction, they can profit.

And individuals can do the same. By reading your habits and behaviors, you can understand where friction comes in and what it looks like. 

friction plays two roles in our efforts to build new habits. In the case of the chocolate, you have increased the friction – or else made it harder to accomplish. On the other hand, for both the doctor’s appointment and running, you reduced friction – or made them easier to accomplish.

If you’re looking to make changes, consider if you need to reduce or increase friction. From there, you can set goals and work at them by adjusting your friction. 



------

[[1\]](#_ftnref1) [Habits Guide: How to Build Good Habits and Break Bad Ones (jamesclear.com)](https://jamesclear.com/habits)

[[2\]](#_ftnref2) Insert footnote

[[3\]](#_ftnref3) Check out [this fantastic episode](https://hiddenbrain.org/podcast/work-2-0-the-obstacles-you-dont-see/) from the podcast Hidden Brain, which discusses the relationship between friction and fuel, and provides some fascinating real world examples to contextualize this concept.

[[4\]](#_ftnref4) Just to be clear - I'm not advocating for not taking the stairs!